So a declaration consists of the data type
and variable name or names.
A variable name must be a valid identifier.
Now you can identify multiple variables
of the same type on a single line,
but not multiple variables of different types.
So what we're going to do is create a new foo class
in a new IntelliJ project.
I've called mine PrimitiveData.
So let's go ahead and do that.
I'm gonna paste in the code.
Call this one Foo, and I promise we'll start using
more meaningful names as we go through the course.
So you can see we've got a basic class there
with a main method, and you can see
there's a variable declaration for each
of the eight primitive data types in Java.
Now this code is demonstrating that you can declare
multiple variables of the same type on a single line.
You can see I've done that on lines 14 and 18.
What happens though if we try to add multiple variables
of different types on the same line?
Well, let's test that by typing int myInt comma
short
mySecondShort.
You can see we've got a compile error there,
Identifier expected, so that confirms that we can't have
different types of multiple variables on the same line.
Solution is to either break it into multiple lines,
or we can also convert the comma to a semicolon,
which, of course, is valid in Java, enabling you,
you can have multiple statements on a single line.
All right, so at this point we've now got
data variables with no data.
Data in the form of literals can be assigned
to these variables.
The exam explores some of the implications
of setting literal data to typed variables
where there is a type mismatch.
Valid literals are numeric values in base 10,
hexadecimal or octal forms.
An unmodified integer value is assumed
to be a 32 bit int primitive, and a value
containing a decimal point is assumed to be a 64 bit double.
Keep in mind that in Java a single character value
in single quotes is considered a valid char literal,
but any characters surrounded by double quotes
is considered to be a string literal.
So in other words, A in single quotes is not equal
to A in double quotes, when it comes to literals in Java.
So in this slide, you can see for the various literal types,
numeric, char and Boolean, I'm showing
some valid literal examples for you.
Basically you should be familiar with all the ways
to set a variable to a literal for the exam.
Let's now create a new class Foo2
in our primitive data project,
which will demonstrate some of these things on the slides,
basically initialising primitive data variable declarations
to literal values.
So we'll go back to our project, as I mentioned,
in the src file to we'll create a new project,
a new class rather, Foo2, and I'm going to
paste in that code that I mentioned.
And you can see that what I've done
for the primitive data types
is set the data variables to the value 127.
Now this is a valid numeric value for all the data types,
with the exception of a Boolean.
We'll explore literals and their ranges more in depth
in the next video, actually.
But you can that I've got that example there,
and, moving down, we've just got a simple output.
So, if I run this Foo2,
no real surprises there.
We've got the various values
associated with each of our variables.
The point there was that you can see that
printing the primitive data variables
results in different formats in some cases.
So let me just run that again.
Based on the type of the data variable,
you will get different formats in some cases.
In some cases, numeric literals will have a suffix.
Valid suffixes exist for type long, float and double,
and the case of the suffix doesn't matter,
which force the literal value being assigned to the variable
to be the type specified by the suffix.
And I'll just paste in some code to make that clearer.
Again, these are things that you'll certainly want to know
leading in to the exam.
If I paste this code down below the other code,
no real surprises there.
You can see we're using the L suffix for a long,
the F for our floats, and the D suffix for our doubles.
Running the code.
And the output is as expected.
Now, you also use the exponential literal form
for doubles and floats, and I'll copy some code in there
to paste to show you that format.
You can see we've got a different format there,
and again that's using the exponential literal form.
In addition, you can use binary, hexadecimal,
and octal forms of literals for any of the numerics.
So let's see an example of a binary, octal and hexadecimal.
Typo there, which I'll fix.
So you can see the first example there, binary value,
zero B on line 53,
zero B signifies that it's a binary number
'cause the prefix is zero B.
On line 56, octal, the value there is
octal value for 127, zero one seven seven,
with zero being the octal prefix,
and hexadecimal 127, we're using that on line 159,
to assign that value, and zero X is the prefix
for specifying a hexadecimal number.
You can also use a char literal for any of the numerics,
which is something that you should know,
so let's have a look at some code for that.
You can see that we've defined that on line 62 through 64,
and if we run that,
we should also get our other outputs,
your confirmation that our binary, octal,
and hexadecimal values are all 127,
but also the values for our byte, char and double,
97, A, and 97 dot zero, respectively.
In addition, you can use Unicode characters
for any of the numerics, so let's see an example of that.
Run that.
And there's our Unicode representation values,
and obviously it's the backslash U being the prefix
to define a Unicode number, then a four digit number.
Now, you can use the underscore for readability
of any numeric value, as long as you don't
butt the underscore up against the prefix or suffix,
and it's not the first or last symbol in the literal.
You'll note that commas are not valid in numeric literals.
An example would probably help here,
so let me just copy a bit of code again.
We'll paste that in.
And you can see our examples there.
So we've got various versions
which are all valid of defining values.
We've got octal number there, we've got a hexadecimal number
and a binary number and other numbers,
all using underscores, which are completely valid.
And we can run this.
And you can see that's quite valid,
and the code compiles and works.
So I've spent a lot of time in this video
showing you values that are valid.
Let's finish the video by looking
at some things that aren't valid.
Firstly we'll start with exploring some literals
with underscores that aren't valid.
So I'm going to take some code,
copy that, paste it in, and you can see
that we've got some errors there, and I put a comment
to let you know the reasons why it's not valid.
Firstly, have line 92.
We've got a binary number there, but we can't have
an underscore directly after the prefix zero B,
and the same applies for the hexadecimal number,
which we've defined on line 93.
Again, you can't have an underscore
directly after that prefix.
In the case of line 94, you can't have an underscore
at the end of a literal number.
Line 95, an underscore cannot be prior to a suffix,
and the suffix, if you recall, was L for long,
F for float and D for double.
The underscore cannot be first character
at the start of a literal, so you can't have
an underscore 1000 there on line 96, which is invalid,
and also the underscore cannot prefix
an exponential in a literal as well.
You can see the underscore E 10 being invalid.
Now you can't set a Boolean to zero
or anything but true or false.
Keep that in mind, that some languages you can do that,
but you can't in Java.
And also you cannot set any primitive value to null.
So I'm gonna finish off, and just show you that example
of both the Boolean number, trying to set that
to a value of zero, which is invalid,
but also trying to assign some of these values
to null, or assigning a value of null to them.
You can see they're all invalid,
looking for byte and found a null, and for Boolean,
looking for Boolean and it's found an int there.
Right, so let's finish the video here.
What I'm gonna do before I finish is just comment this out,
so that if you happen to download this file,
it'll be at least valid code, and it will compile.
So, see you in the next video.